NYT20001114.0210.0200 
NEWS STORY 
2000-11-14 15:53:00 
A8685 & Cx1f ; taf-z u d BC-SIMPLE-COOKING-NYT & LR ; 11-14 0619 
BC-SIMPLE-COOKING-NYT 
PUDDING , SWEET AND NOT 
& UR ; By MARK HULBERT & LR ; & QC ; & QL ; & UR ; c. 2000 N.Y. Times News Service & LR ; & QC ; & QL ; 
NEW YORK _ Bread pudding is one of the most traditional American dishes ; cookbooks from the 18th century have recipes for it that are more or less the same as what we make today . 
But bread pudding is also a minimalist sort of dish , no more than dry bread mixed together with milk and eggs and whatever flavor strikes the cook , and then baked until it is rich and custardy . 
It can be savory or sweet , and either makes a simple , interesting substitute for a standard part of the Thanksgiving meal . 
Savory bread pudding is a luxurious side dish that can be served in place of stuffing . 
Or it can be the extra stuffing that everyone always wants ( but not dry like the usual kind baked outside a turkey can be ) . 
My basic recipe combines the cubed bread , eggs and milk with a couple of cheeses . 
( If you 're desperate for oven space , bake it and then heat it just before serving , or serve it at room temperature . 
) You can make it without the mushrooms , too . 
The pudding can also be varied by adding a pinch of thyme or sage , chopped nuts or cooked chestnuts , or about a cup of grated sweet potato or chopped scallions . 
If you want a pudding that tastes more like stuffing , just add chopped celery , onions , carrots and herbs . 
Sweet bread pudding is made the same way , but with fewer ingredients . 
I use maple syrup instead of sugar for the extra flavor and moisture . 
You can add more spices , including a small grating of nutmeg , chopped crystallized ginger , raisins or prunes soaked in Armagnac . 
The kind of bread you choose makes a difference . 
Fluffy packaged white bread disappears ; the crusts of crisp baguettes and peasant breads never become tender . 
For savory pudding , stick to long , wide inexpensive loaves , usually called Italian bread ; for sweet pudding , stale hallah is best . 
And make sure the bread is thoroughly and evenly soaked before it 's baked ; I like to submerge the bread with a weighted plate before baking . 
Then you do n't even have to stir . 
